---
title: JAMStack Part II
date: '2018-10-11T15:07:00-04:00'
layout: default
categories:
- JavaScript
- JAMStack
---
So in my last post (Part I below), I went over my experience researching and building JAMStack sites with Jekyll, Algolia, and Webtask. In this second part of my JAMStack posts, I want to go over what I do with a JAMStack project after I have it built and ready to deliver. I'll be going over the services I use for hosting, deployments, and content management.

One of the biggest benefits of JAMStack sites is that, as static sites, they are incredibly simple and easy to host. There's no database to run, no backend language to install or configure, and no logic that needs to run every time the site is accessed. It's just plain HTML files to be delivered. Because of these benefits and the growing popularity of static sites, there are services popping up that are dedicated to hosting static sites at a fraction of the cost of traditional hosting. The one I use for all my JAMStack projects is <a href="https://www.netlify.com" target="_blank">Netlify</a>. My personal Netlify account that I use to host a small number of sites is absolutely <em>free</em>, because of how little it costs them to host these sites. At a more enterprise level, it costs the same to host hundreds of static sites on Netlify as it does to host a single WordPress site on a traditional host in my experience. But for me, the savings aren't even the best part of using Netlify.

Netlify offers a wide array of services specific to static sites in addition to hosting, like deployment previews, form submission handling, and A/B testing. In my case, I connect a Jekyll site's GitHub repo to my Netlify account. Netlify will take that code, build out the static site from it, and deploy that static site to a server for me. The really cool part is that Netlify will run that deploy process for every git branch I have in that repo, and assign each branch a separate placeholder url for me to access. So I am automatically able to test new features that I have branched off the main site before I merge them back in. There's no provisioning a separate staging environment to test and QA code, I create the branch and all of that is done for me. I cannot even describe how beneficial this feature has been for me coming from WordPress development. <em>And that's not all</em>, Netlify can even use these separate branch deployments to create A/B tests.

So I've covered how JAMStack can be just as powerful as WordPress for building templates and functionality, but what about content? WordPress' excellent admin interface is its main selling point for many people.

Because there's no backend functionality on a JAMStack site, it will not have a CMS built in like WordPress. We again need to call on an external service to function as our CMS. Having tried several of these headless content management systems, the most WordPress-like one I've found is <a href="https://forestry.io" target="_blank">Forestry</a>. Similar to Netlify, I can connect my GitHub repo of a JAMStack project to my Forestry account (also <em>free</em>). Forestry will then read the repo and create a model of the content in a user interface very similar to the WordPress admin. As content is created and changed through the Forestry interface, it will make git commits directly back to the repo. So the site's content is versioned through an actual VCS, which I've found to be very helpful compared to WordPress' revisions functionality.

Another very helpful feature unique to Forestry is Front Matter Templates (FMTs). I mentioned in my last post how front matter is Jekyll's equivalent to post meta for storing data like titles, dates, templates, and any other custom values you add. Using FMTs, Forestry will create an intuitive user interface for controlling the values of each different front matter. So I can create a Forestry config file in the site code which specifies that a particular front matter should display as a checkmark in Forestry, or a dropdown list of options, a calendar date, a sortable list, a file upload, or many other options. This is where a static site can really become fully fleshed out with complex layouts and still have easy-to-manage content. Similar to Advanced Custom Fields in WordPress, this gives me a lot of control over how I want to control content editing.

Admittedly, Forestry's interface isn't always as straightforward or helpful as the WordPress admin, but it has already come a long way in the short amount of time I've been using it. And I know personally that there is a very dedicated and talented team behind its development.

With these last two posts, I covered pretty much everything at a high level that I wanted to say about how I work in JAMStack. In my next (and hopefully last) post on this topic, I want to dig deeper into the benefits of JAMStack, and go over what all this means for me as a developer.
